Book Question 1.5.5 (open-ended)
Estimate the minimum amount of time (in days) that would be required for quick-find to solve
a dynamic connectivity problem with 10^9 sites and 10^6 input pairs, on a computer capable
of executing 10^9 instructions per second. Assume that each iteration of the inner for loop
requires 10 machine instructions.

Total = input pairs x N (sites) x 10(machine instructions) / CPU(10⁹)

Total = 10⁶ * (10⁹ * 10) / 10⁹ = 10⁷/ 60 * 60 * 24
Total = 115 days


2. Which of the following input array property is the most effective when using 3-way partitioning with quicksort?
Few distinct keys.

3. Which statement best describes the advantage of using three-way partitioning in Quicksort when dealing with large
numbers of duplicate keys?
Three-way partitioning divides the array into three parts: less than, equal to, and greater than the partitioning
element. This approach minimizes comparisons and achieves entropy optimality, making it efficient for sorting arrays
with many duplicate keys.

4.Discuss the theoretical significance and practical limitations of the linear time selection algorithm discovered
in 1973. How does this compare to the practical use of the Quickselect method based on Quicksort partitioning in terms
 of average and worst-case performance?

 Median of Medians(1973) offers a guarantee that the complexity will be O(n) - linear. However, it is slower because
it spends extra time searching for an appropriate pivot. On the other hand, Quickselect does not offer such a
guarantee, and its worst-case scenario is quadratic O(n^2), but the chances of occurrence are very low. On average,
it has expected O(n) - linear.

5.Explain how the partitioning process in the quicksort algorithm works and why it is crucial for the algorithm's
efficiency.
Partitioning is powerful because, although it does not sort the array immediately, it guarantees the invariant that
all elements smaller than the pivot are on the left and all larger elements are on the right. This already places the
pivot in its final position and divides the problem into two smaller subproblems. Each partition will costs O(n), and
 since the recursion has logarithmic height, the expected total cost is 𝑂( 𝑛 log 𝑛).

6. What is the expected running time of randomized quicksort to sort an array of n distinct keys when the array is
 already sorted? Linear-logarithm O(n log n).

7.Discuss the reasoning behind using both quicksort and mergesort in Java's Arrays.sort method. Why does the choice of
algorithm depend on the data type being sorted, and what are the implications of this decision in terms of performance
and memory usage?

In Java Array.sort the QuickSort is used for primitives because it’s fast and in-place, and primitives don’t carry
extra information—swapping two identical integers doesn’t affect anything. For objects, MergeSort is used because it’s
stable: it preserves the relative order of equal elements (e.g., two people aged 35 will remain in the order they
appeared).

The trade-off is that MergeSort is slightly slower and uses extra memory for a temporary array during merging and also
offers a guarantee of O(n log n) performance, while QuickSort can degrade to O(n^2) in the worst case but is generally
 faster.

 8. Why does Arrays.sort() in Java use mergesort instead of quicksort when sorting reference types ?
Stability and guaranteed n log n performance.



9.
